
EvidentialGene computes ORFs (proteins and coding sequences of those), and
its method is drawn on Brian Haas's ORF computations, which also form the
Transdecoder package now. ORF computation is fairly straight-forward, the
only differences among methods will be at the edges for complicated,
unusual cases. I've recently looked at results from Transdecoder versus
Evigene, and I don't think Transdecoder is giving you improvements, it may
well be reducing the number of best orthology proteins using its Predict
variant. The initial TransDecoder.LongOrfs gives way to many results to be
useful without the sort of filtering that Evigene does.

Stats for Evigene versus Transdecoder, computing proteins for a known gene
set, the Arabidopsis plant. You can see why I recommen using
Evigene's computed ORFs, which are a better match to these carefully
curated plant proteins. You can reproduce this test fairly easily, or with
another reference species, and may get other results if you use other
options/data.

Published gene set: 
  Araport11_genes.201606.cdna and  Araport11_genes.201606.aa, 
  n=48,359 transcripts/proteins of 27,655 gene loci
  Arabidopsis thaliana Genome Annotation Official Release, date: June 2016

Method of ORF from cDNA transcripts:
  1. Evigene $evigene/scripts/cdna_bestorf.pl -nostop -cdna Araport11_genes.201606.cdna -outaa arath16ap_evgorf.aa
  2. TransDecoder.LongOrfs -t Araport11_genes.201606.cdna -m 30
  3. TransDecoder.Predict -t Araport11_genes.201606.cdna

Predicted ORFs versus published Araport11_genes.201606.aa
1. Evigene cdna_bestorf
  Total=50,846, Identical=46,639, Missed=23, aveSizeDiff= +1.3, sumSizeDiff=67573   
    (includes 2,510 "UTRorf" extra orf/transcript)
2. TransDecoder.LongOrfs
  Total=492,753, Identical=41,233 Missed=25, aveSizeDiff= +3.7, sumSizeDiff=181235 
    (includes ~10 ORF per transcript)
3. TransDecoder.Predict
  Total=77,414, Identical=28,399, Missed=1363, aveSizeDiff= -0.4, sumSizeDiff=-19799
    (includes 29,055 "UTRorf" extra orf/transcript)

Identical counts are number of identical proteins for reference vs computed.
For those Missed, there are some very short "proteins" in this published
plant gene set, including one with 1 amino only, the others with a few
aminos up to 20 or so .. these are below the computed ORF cut-off of 30 aa.

-------------

Evigene gives you a single longest ORF per transcript, which are checked
and filtered for redundancy, with the non-redundant 'okayset' that contains
proteins, CDS and transcripts for the non-redundant genes, and those
alternate transcripts per gene that have different CDS from longest. So my
suggestion is that you will get better results using the Evigene okayset of
proteins for orthology computations. I suggest also that using BLASTp of
those proteins by reference set (e.g. from Swissprot) will give more
accurate results than using BLASTx of the transcript or CDS nucleic
sequences to reference proteins. This later method will hide errors in the
transcripts (indels, inner stop codings, fragmented CDS). More important to
you perhaps, the protein x protein BLASTp is more sensitive in finding
significant homology.

The results of ignoring genes that lack homology to your reference proteins
is variable: it depends on how complete the reference gene set is w/
respect to all the genes your organism is expressing, and how close in
phylogeny they are. I've found some large numbers (1000s) of putative
recent orthology genes in some fishes, water fleas, plants and other
species that exist across a narrow phylogenetic span at least, but are not
found in more distant model species. These recently evolved genes can be
among those with active differential expression, active in response to
environmental stresses unique to those species. Ignoring these recent genes
means possibly ignoring important gene responses in your organism.

In terms of measuring differential expression, there are definite effects
among the alternate transcripts, which share large portions of same exons,
but differ at certain exons (which may be where your differential effects
are). It is valuable, but harder, to measure DE among alternates of same
locus due to the high portion of shared reads.

There are also definite effects in non-coding regions, including non-coding
genes but also long UTR and intergenic "ambiguous" expression that is hard
to define as genic. Whether you measure that or not is your decision.

I recommend measuring expression of all your genes, then report effects in
those broad classes of (a) coding genes with homology, (b) coding without
definite homology, (c) non-coding.
